Good day ,I'm Norman Wildberger we've been
talking quite a lot about this notion of
projective quadrants between projective one points
in a one-dimensional setting just involving the
projective line because it's so important I want
to spend a few videos try to establish for you
some visual and physical models of what this
projective quadrants might mean especially in a
relativistic setting so we're going to be looking
at a number of different topics which are closely
connected we will be looking at relativistic
velocity addition of Einstein which turns out
to be very closely connected with this notion of
projective quadrants and the formulas that we've
established we're gonna introduce this idea of
a core circle or a decore circle and I'm gonna
connect with an interesting observation made by a
viewer of this channel Paul Miller and introduce
a protractor that he investigated so these things
are connected but we're going to sort of establish
some sort of one at a time then you'll see
the relations between them so today we want
to talk about relativistic velocity addition
going back to Albert Einstein and how that's
actually intimately associated with the formulas
that we've been developing in this one-dimensional
read or relativistic setting so we really want
to address this question of how we interpret and
visualize projective quadrants --is rotations
and reflections especially in this relativistic
setting where our intuition is not used to it okay
so one answer is that the red/green projective
geometry really turns out to be relativity in
the one-dimensional situation one-dimensional
relativistic geometry is really pretty well the
same as red or green projective geometry as we've
defined it and it turns out that this is also
really the same as hyperbolic geometry in one
dimension so not only is this one-dimensional
red or green projective geometry the door to
understanding Einstein's relativistic theory
of special relativity it's also the first step
towards understanding hyperbolic geometry which
is this huge and lovely subject which we'll be
saying quite a lot more about and of course which
there is a separate series here in this channel
called universal hyperbolic geometry by the way
that series has a lot in common with some of the
things that we've been talking about in these
last few videos and that we will be talking
about in the videos to come there's another kind
of answer to this that we can interpret projective
geometry in one dimension as a pencil of lines in
a related two-dimensional affine geometry so we
can visualize the projective one-dimensional
geometry inside a larger two dimensional a
fine situation and then it turns out as I've
said that the projective notion of quadrants
we've been talking about really is the same as
the notion of spread in this affine setting so
the formulas that we're establishing in this
projective one-dimensional setting are going
to be key formulas for two-dimensional regular
planar geometry just in the affine setting
absolutely key and we're also going to connect
this one-dimensional projective geometry to a
study of circles it turns out that there's a
remarkable connection we've talked about this
already between the one-dimensional projective
line and conics in particular circles and we'll
see that if we think about circles in a somewhat
novel way introduced this idea of course circles
then we'll be able to really cast a lot of new
light on the story and we'll make visible Paul
Miller's a protractor not just in the Euclidian
setting but in other settings as well there's a
lot of exciting ideas coming together here in the
next few videos especially important I think to
physics students and physicists okay this is a
slightly new way of thinking about fundamental
G metrical framework for relativistic geometry
so let's introduce Einstein's understanding of
relativistic velocity addition let's start with
the more familiar ordinary additional velocities
so in everyday life velocities are usually
regarded as vectors and so they add linearly
so a standard example when one-dimensional
setting and here's a train zipping by on this
straight track going at say 200 kilometers per
hour sitting on top of the Train there's a fellow
with a bow and arrow and he shoots an arrow in
this direction the same direction of the train
is going and let's suppose that ordinarily an
arrow will fly with a speed of 300 kilometers
an hour all right so do an observer on the
ground say over here the cumulative velocity
of this arrow is going to be the sum of this
vector quantity and this vector quantity so the
velocity of the arrow with respect to the ground
it's going to be just the sum of these two things
and geometrically we can think about adding this
arrow represents 200 kilometers an hour and this
arrow which represents 300 kilometres an hour and
we add them together as we usually do and we get
this longer arrow representing 500 kilometers per
hour arithmetic alee the three the velocity of the
arrow as regarded by a stationary observer is the
sum of the velocities of the train and the arrow
by itself independent of where it is now there's
another way of interpreting what's going on here
in terms of a time-space diagram when we visualize
one dimensional motion one way of doing it is to
think of the axis as being represented vertically
and time as the independent axis in this direction
then emotion straight motion without any
acceleration is represented by some kind
of line and the steeper the line is the faster
the corresponding velocity if something's not
moving at all it corresponds to a line like
this this might represent 200 kilometers an
hour because in one hour it goes 200 kilometers
this would represent 300 kilometers an hour in
one hour it goes 300 kilometers and here's
the cumulative velocity 500 kilometers now
are represented by a line so in this story
velocities are represented by lines to the
origin so that's very familiar situation we can
see that it's kind of our projective geometry
point of view so in Albert Einstein's special
theory of relativity we're dealing mostly with
relatively fast motion that is motion which is a
reasonable fraction of the speed of light speed
of light of course is very very fast it's say
it takes about eight minutes for light to get
from the Sun to the earth so it's quite fast
let's choose our units for convenience so that
the speed of light is actually equal to one that
makes the formulas a little bit simpler and this
is the key formula that Einstein discovered
that if you want to calculate what happens to
the addition of velocities in this relativistic
setting you don't just take the sum but you have
to take the sum divided by one plus the product
we might introduce a different kind of notation
for this call this V 3 V 1 circle some V 2 so for
example if we have a rocket ship going along in a
one-dimensional setting and say the velocity
of the rocket ship is 3/4 it's going 3/4 of
the speed of light and on top of the rocket ship
there's an archer who shoots an arrow in the same
direction and if the velocity of the arrow is
ordinarily 1/2 the speed of light then we might
ask what's the cumulative velocity of the arrow
given that it's being fired from this already
moving rocketship with respect to an observer
which is stationary with respect to this frame
okay there's some possible questions there
about what those various words mean that
I'm using there but let's sort of stick with the
basic understanding of that then Einstein would
say okay then this is the situation here where
v1 is 3/4 v2 is 1/2 to calculate the cumulative
velocity we have to use this formula which is
3/4 plus 1/2 divided by 1 plus the product 3/4
times 1/2 the sum is 5 quarters and down here
in the denominator we have 1 plus 3/8 which is
11 eighths for a total of 10 over 11 so instead of
getting five quarters which is what we would sort
of naively expect from our intuition in daily
life we actually get something quite different
we get 10 over 11 which is significantly less in
particular it's less than 1 all right so here's
now an interesting exercise just to show that
using this formula purely arithmetic 'le than
if we have two numbers v1 and v2 which are both
positive but less than 1 then this circle some of
them this particular combination v3 will be first
of all at least as big as either of them and it
will also be less than 1 Einstein postulated
that it's not possible for particles in our
world to go faster than the speed of light and
this is sometimes taken as a working assumption
by physicists but it's probably good to have
an open-minded view about these things and not
to introduce assumptions unless they're really
self-evident so if we keep open the possibility
that there might be things that go faster than
the speed of light then we could contemplate
the same formula in the situation where v1 say
is 2 and B 2 is 5 in that case the formula has
also perhaps a surprising answer we would get v3
is 2 plus 5 over 1 plus 2 times 5 which is 7 over
11 something's growing 2 times the speed of light
and then something else is going 5 times the speed
of light then somehow the cumulative effect
of that might be 7-elevens the speed of light
here's another example if v1 equals one so
if one of these velocities exactly the speed
of light itself then arithmetic aliy we're going
to get v3 equals 1 plus b2 over 1 plus V 2 which
is 1 this is sort of saying that the speed of
light is more or less constant in any frame of
reference we imagine a rocket ship and the light
being beamed out from it at the speed of light
then this observer is going to still measure this
speed of light as being equal to 1 the same thing
that person on the rocket ship does in fact
this is really Einstein starting point to the
whole theory this this basic assumption that
the speed of light is the same in all inertial
reference frames and it's really a consequence
of this assumption that led Einstein to some
derivations which resulted in this formula so it's
no surprise that this ends up happening because
it's really built into the whole situation is a
basic starting point in everyday life if we have
two velocities in the same direction we refer
to the distinction between those velocities
by measuring a difference so for example if those
two velocities are being wanted me to then we talk
about v2 minus v1 is representing the difference
between those velocities that's a measure of how
different they are that does depend on which one
we take first so I've been keeping with our a fine
point of view look we wanted something that was
independent of the orientation we could take the
absolute value of that difference or we could
also perhaps take the square of that difference
so for example if one velocity is 200 kilometers
now or and the other one's 300 kilometers an hour
then the difference will be 100 kilometers an
hour plus or minus depending on which way you
do it okay this difference is independent of the
observer so if both velocities are shot from a
moving train then to another observer the two new
velocities will be V 1 plus V 3 and V 2 plus V 3
and a basic fact is that the difference between
these two is the same as the difference between
the original two so this taking of differences
of velocities is something that's maintained
by this process of changing the observer so
that's why it's a useful quantity however in
special relativity this difference is no longer
so relevant for example if V 1 equals 3/4 and
v2 equals 1/5 say and V 3 equals 1/2 suppose we
look at V 1 circles on V 3 that's 3/4 plus 1/2
divided by 1 plus 3/4 times 1/2 which we see as
10 over 11 on the other hand V 2 circles on V 3
would be 1/5 plus 1/2 over 1 plus the product
1/5 times 1/2 which is 7 over 11 so now if we
take the usual difference between the two starting
velocities 3/4 one-fifth so the difference being
1/5 minus 3/4 or minus 11 twentieths and compare
that to the differences between these two well
the difference here is minus 4 over 11 then we
see that these are not the same looking at the
differences between velocities is not maintained
by this circle operation so it's less useful
because it depends on our particular orientation
so Weinstein naturally asked well if we are
going to change velocities in the way that we've
described with this circle operation of addition
then how should we measure the separation between
velocities in such a way that's independent of
observer in other words it doesn't change when
we circle add a velocity to both of the ones
that we have and the answer to that question
naturally connects to our notion of projective
quadrants in this relativistic or read setting
and provides a an interpretation or a meaning to
that projective quadrants so the natural question
here is what plays the role of the difference for
a relativistic addition where we considering
v1 circle some v2 to be v1 plus v2 over 1
plus v1 v2 of velocities and the answer is they're
projective quadrants that we've been talking about
but in a relativistic setting and here's
the definition I remind you that they're
red projective quadrants between 1/2 V 1 and 1/2
V 2 is minus 1 times V 2 minus V 1 times 1 so V
2 minus V 1 all squared divided by 1 squared
minus V 1 squared times 1 squared minus V 2
squared and let's give this a name if we're
just really interested in the velocities v1
v2 and let's get rid of this minus sign just so
that it's always positive for situations where
v1 and v2 are less than 1 so we might say I for
interval of v1 v2 is minus Q of v1 v2 referring
to this thing here all right so an example if v1
equals 3/4 and v2 equals 1/5 then the interval
between v1 and v2 as we've defined it here would
be 1/5 minus 3/4 all squared divided by 1 minus
1/5 squared times 1 minus 3/4 squared and that
turns out to be 121 over 168 now if we have some
third velocity and we add that velocity in this
relativistic einstein fashion to both of these
then v1 circles some v3 is 10 over 11 we've
seen that before and the two circle some v3
is 7 over 11 now if we take the eye of these two
then we have to take 7 over 11 minus 10 over 11
all squared + 1 minus 7 11 squared times 1 minus
10 11 squared and that turns out to be 121 over
168 as well so let's prove that that example was
just not a coincidence that in general I of v1
circles some V 3 V 2 circle some v3 equals I of
v1 v2 all right so the left hand side what do we
have to do well we have to take the difference
of these two things and square it and divide by
one minus this thing squared times one minus this
thing squared and these circle sums are well there
is V 1 circles on v3 appearing there and there and
V 2 circle some v3 is appearing there and there so
we want to simplify this well what we want to do
here now is look at a common denominator basically
there's a 1 plus V 1 V 3 times a 1 plus V 2 V
3 which will be a common denominator for this
thing inside the brackets and it's square will
then be a common denominator for the numerator
over here in the denominator we'll have that
same factor appearing as a common denominator
once we get all those fractions clear so those
two common denominators will cancel and we can
write down what we will get by writing this thing
times v1 plus v3 minus this thing times v2 plus
v3 all squared that'll be the numerator of this
once we get that common denominator established
and the numerator of what's happening here will
be the 1 plus v1 v3 squared minus this thing
squared and over here same thing 1 plus V 2 V 3
squared minus v2 plus v3 squared when we expand
this numerator inside here you'll get a V 1 minus
of e to the v3 here and the minus V 3 will cancel
we'll get a plus V 2 V 3 V 1 and a minus v1 v2 v3
which will cancel and then there will be a v2 v3
square term here and a minus V 3 squared times
V 1 term here in the denominator when we expand
this out the cross terms two times this times this
and two times this times this are going to cancel
and we'll just get this thing squared plus this
thing squared minus this thing squared minus this
thing squared and the same kind of thing from here
this thing squared plus this thing squared minus
v2 squared minus v3 squared now each of these in
the denominator are actually factorizable so this
is really the same as 1 minus v1 squared times 1
minus v3 squared and this thing is really v1 minus
v2 squared times 1 minus v3 squared so altogether
there's two of these factors that appear in the
denominator and in the numerator there's a v1
minus v2 factor which is common here and here
if we take that out we'll have a 1 minus B three
squared as the other factor and when we square
both them we get v1 minus v2 squared times one
minus b3 squared squared now pleasently we can
cancel this one minus V 3 squared which appears
in the numerator and denominator there to just
get v1 minus v2 squared over one minus v1 squared
1 minus v2 squared which is the original interval
between v1 and v2 so this is a general calculation
which establishes that from a relativistic point
of view if we believe in Einstein's additional
velocities then this particular interval this
quantity is really the right quantity to measure
the separation of these relativistic velocities
and because we're talking about velocities here
only we're really in a one dimensional situation
and if you look carefully at what we've just done
you might see that we've actually done this before
this is just a restatement or a rewriting of
the fact that a relativistic rotation actually
is mysamma tree of the projective quadrants in
the red setting all right so I remind you that
when we were talking about relativistic projective
quadrants --is we define the relativistic rotation
Rho sub R for the red one to be defined by this
symbol that X to Y times this row Super R sub a
to be is by definition equal to a times X plus
B times y and B times X plus a times y so this
was the relativistic version of rotation that we
introduced in their red setting in particular if
we restrict ourselves to projective one point of
the form 1 to v1 so that they really correspond to
lines corresponding to velocities of v1 then 1
2 v1 times Row 1 2 v2 well it turns out to be 1
times 1 plus v1 times V 2 to V 2 plus V 1 and then
if we rewrite this by dividing by the first term
to get a 1 there so that's of the same form as we
started then we see that there's a V 1 plus V 2
over 1 plus V 1 V 2 in other words 1 2 V 1 circle
some V 2 so Einsteins a relativistic addition
is exactly the algebraic structure on the red
projective line we introduced algebraic structure
you can compose this one with the corresponding
1 for V 1 and this is the corresponding formula
for the product of those 1 points inherited from
the composition of rotations so basically we're
just taking this formula and restricting it
to things of the form 1 to V 1 1 to V 2 and
getting something of the form 1 2 something
else and there's something else that we get
is V 1 circle some V 2 and Einstein's interval
measurement between velocities is essentially
the red projective quadrants so it's it's rather
amusing to contemplate that the the essential
formula here in terms of the Einstein formulation
of velocity addition and in fact the interval
between the velocities is really inherent in this
purely algebraic point of view towards projective
1 points that we could have established or could
have been established centuries before Einstein
in fact I could have introduced the whole red
or relativistic projective quadrants situation
by first talking about the physics and saying that
the physics wants us to introduce things a certain
way but I wanted to emphasize to you that the
mathematics is really independent of the physics
even though it naturally connects to it that's
really just a historical accident the way things
actually happen to have happened that logically
the idea of investigating a projective line in a
variety of different algebraic ways is actually
pretty natural kind of thing to do from a pure
mathematics point of view it's very very natural
thing to do and with a little bit of alteration
the history of the subject and the corresponding
physics could have been very very different if the
mathematicians had let go of Euclid a little
bit earlier Euclid had not been so dominant
in framing the discussion of what geometry was
then mathematicians could have really set the
stage for a relativity long before Einstein came
around so the one-dimensional projective geometry
in the red setting which is essentially rests
on this bilinear form with matrix 1 0 0 minus
1 already contains a fundamental aspect of special
relativity and as I've mentioned it turns out also
to be exactly 1 dimensional hyperbolic geometry
so the geometry that we build from this particular
quadratic form even though it's still very modest
one-dimensional situation already has in it the
seeds of 20th century physics or at least a good
part of 20th century physics very important part
as well as the whole theory of hyperbolic geometry
in fact in a much more general setting than it's
usually developed today all right so it's
remarkably rich sort of fundamental thing
to investigate what happens when we consider this
projective line from a relativistic or red point
of view where we change the familiar euclidean
plus sign to a minus sign and investigate
the consequences and one of the reasons that we
haven't done that before historically as I've said
is because of the dominance of Euclid but there
also another reason which is the dominance of the
real number mind frame which makes it difficult to
understand what's going on with this relativistic
geometry because if you're oriented towards real
numbers and you think that everything revolves
about angles and cosine and sine functions and
are all these infinite processes and square roots
and so on then it becomes hard to transfer that
stuff over to this relativistic setting because
the angles become problematic the angles become
problematic so that that whole geometry that
you've built up with an intuition of angles 30
degrees plus 45 equals 75 you know etc that whole
intuition doesn't work very well over here you
can try to force it to work and people have done
this quite a lot but it's not really convincing
and doesn't end up really working naturally and
beautifully you have to let go of the dreaming
with respect to angles the rational geometry
point of view where you say let's do everything
completely algebraically no infinite processes
that's the orientation that allows this to come
into focus and allows you to see all these very
important developments naturally arising in front
of you yet another advantage and letting go of the
real number dreaming okay so for a little bit of a
new spin on special relativity as well which might
interest some of you with physical orientations
here the essential Lorentz transformations which
are implicit in in the discussion here so this
actually goes back to dutch mathematician Lorentz
who actually investigated some of these things
before Einstein did this can be viewed these
days in a in a somewhat novel way and if you're
interested in that I recommend the later series
in the wild little series 37 through to 40
as well as a special lecture that's in the
math seminar is called bats echolocation in a
Newtonian view of Einstein's special relativity
which shows that the essential formulas that
we've been talking about in this lecture don't
intrinsically necessarily rely on the speed
of light and the constancy of the speed of
light there are manifestations actually also of a
situation where you have just some common medium
and propagation speed doesn't have to be light
can be sound so even bats registering the world
around them with sound just the regular sound
will be in a situation to see the formulas of
special relativity that we've been talking about
today this is a thing that physicists should give
some thought to as well there's some issues here
into the in terms of the underlying assumptions
and meanings of terms that physicists use there's
some possibility for discussion and examination
here on the foundational level for physics
as well although I'm probably not going to
go there too far but this is certainly an initial
orientation in that direction okay so this is very
interesting the physical side of the meaning
of projective quadrants and the relativistic
setting I want to now talk about also the visual
or geometrical side which will give you yet more
intuition for what these things mean so I want to
talk about the notion of core circles and then I
want to bring in Paul Miller's protractor
next time to tie all these things together
very exciting stuff I hope you'll join me for
that i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening